The project is designed to develop distance measurement system using HC-SR04(Ultrasonic Sensor) and interfaced with ATMega-328 microcontroller. The developed project is used to measure distance in centimeters with the help of HC-SR04 ultrasonic sensor, ATMEGA 328 microcontroller, LCD display via I2C bus. We know that human audible range is 20hz to 20khz. We can utilize these frequency range waves through ultrasonic sensor HC-SR04.The advantages of this sensor when interfaced with AtMega-328 microntroller which is a control and sensing system, a pro per distance measurement can be made with new techniques.This distance measurement system can be widely used as range meters and as proximity detectors in industries. The hardware part of ultrasonic sensor is interfaced with microcontroller ATMega-328. This method of measurement is efficient way to measure small distances precisely. The distance of an obstacle from the sensor is measured through ultrasonic sensor. After knowing the speed of sound the distance can be calculated. Timer2 of ATMEGA328p is used to generate a Trigger pulse of 20uS, the ultrasonic module sends out a 8cycle burst of 40khz which hits the object surface and returns back to raise an echo pulse. The pulse-width of this pulse is proportional to the distance between the module and Object.
Input capture module of the ATMEGA was used to capture the time between rising and falling edges of the echo pulse. The prescaler of this unit was chosen, such that the resolution of pulse-width is 16uS.The display in use is Hd44780-50 and an integrated chip that converts serial data (via I2C bus) into parallel stream of bits for the LCD.

 

